> [!abstract] 
> **The sum of the interior angles of a triangle. The sum of the interior angles of a polygon. The sum of the exterior angles of a convex polygon.**

### Theorems
___

> [!note] 
> **Theorem 6.5.1 :** The sum of the three interior angles of a triangle are equivalent to two right angles 

**Proof:**  given $\triangle ABC$  , let us prove that $\angle{A}$  + $\angle{B}$   + $\angle{C}$  = $2d$ ( the straight angle) . extend $AC$ beyond $C$ to point $D$ . Then draw $CE  // AB$  . Then $\angle{1}$ = $\angle{A}$ . and by $6.4.1$ ( Two angles whose sides are respectively parallel are either equal or supplementary. ) . $\angle{B}$ = $\angle{2}$ as the alternate . ; hence $\angle{A}$ + $\angle{B}$ + $\angle{C}$ = $\angle{1}$ + $\angle{2}$ + $\angle{C}$ = $2d$  $Q.E.D$ . 

### Corollaries 
___
1. An exterior angle of a triangle is equal to the sum of its opposite (non-adjacent) interior angles.
2. If two angles of a triangle are equal respectively to two angles of another triangle, then the third angles are also respectively equal.
3. In any right triangle the two acute angles are complementary.
4. In a right isosceles triangle each of the acute angles measures 45°.
5. Each angle of an equilateral triangle measures 60°.
6. In a right triangle with one of its acute angles equal 30°, the leg opposite to this angle equals half of the hypotenuse.
7. The sum of the angles of any quadrilateral is equal to four right angles . 

____

> [!note] 
> **Theorem 6.5.2 :** The sum of the interior angles of a convex polygon with n sides is equal to two right angles repeated $(n – 2)$ times.


**Proof :**   Any interior point, e.g. O in Fig. 6.5.2, of a convex polygon, A1 A2 … An can be connected with its vertices by segments lying completely inside the polygon. The sum of the angles of the polygon equals to the sum of angles of all the triangles with the vertices at O, i.e. ΔA1OA3 , ΔA2OA3, …, ΔAn-1OAn, minus the sum of angles formed by the segments emanating from O. The sum of the latter ones is the perigon (complete revolution), and thus, equals 4d. Hence, the sum of all interior angles of the polygon will be n·2d – 4d = 2d (n-2), Q.E.D.

____
> [!note] 
> **Theorem 6.5.3 :** The sum of the interior angles of a polygon with n sides is equal to two right angles repeated n – 2 times. 

**Proof :** This result can be used in order to find the sum of the exterior angles of a polygon.

____
> [!note] 
> **Theorem 6.5.4 :** For any convex polygon the sum of the exterior angles (obtained by producing each side beyond one vertex, in order) is equal to four right angles. 

**Proof :** Extend the sides of a polygon as shown in Fig. 6.5.3. There is a straight angle associated with each vertex, so the sum of these angles will be 2dn where n is the number of sides of the polygon. The sum of all interior angles equals 2d (n – 2), therefore, we shall obtain for the sum of all the exterior angles 2dn – 2d (n – 2) = 4d, Q.E.D




____
Tags : #math #geometry