### Theorem 4.6.1: Relations Between Sides and Angles in a Triangle
**Statement:**
In any triangle \(ABC\):
1. (i) If two sides are congruent, the opposite angles will be congruent.
2. (ii) If two sides are not congruent, the angle opposite the greater side will be greater than the angle opposite the smaller side.

**Proof:**
- **(i)** This has already been established in Theorem 4.4.3.

- **(ii)** Assume \(AB > BC\) in triangle \(ABC\). We want to show that \(\angle ACB > \angle BAC\).

  1. Construct a segment \(BD = BC\) on side \(AB\).
  2. Connect points \(D\) and \(C\), forming triangle \(DBC\), which is isosceles (since \(BD = BC\)).
  3. By Theorem 4.3.1, we have:
  $$
  \angle BDC = \angle BCD.
  $$
  4. Since \(\angle BCD\) is part of \(\angle ACB\), it follows that:
  $$
  \angle BDC < \angle ACB.
  $$
  5. Also, since \(\angle BAC < \angle BDC\) (as \(\angle BDC\) is an exterior angle for triangle \(ADC\)), we have:
  $$
  \angle BAC < \angle BDC = \angle BCD < \angle ACB.
  $$
  6. Therefore, we conclude:
  $$
  \angle ACB > \angle BAC.
  $$

**Note:** The converses of (i) and (ii) are also valid and should be proved using reductio ad absurdum (RAA) by students.

---

### Theorem 4.6.2: Converse Relations Between Angles and Sides in a Triangle
**Statement:**
In any triangle \(ABC\):
1. (i) If two angles are congruent, the opposite sides are congruent.
2. (ii) If two angles are not congruent, the side opposite the greater angle will be greater than the side opposite the smaller angle.

**Proof:**
- **(i)** Suppose \(\angle A = \angle C\). Assume \(AB \neq BC\). Without loss of generality, let \(AB > BC\).

  1. By Theorem 4.6.1, we have:
  $$
  \angle C > \angle A,
  $$
  leading to a contradiction (since \(\angle A = \angle C\)).
  2. Thus, we conclude that:
  $$
  AB = BC.
  $$

- **(ii)** Assume \(\angle C > \angle A\) and prove \(AB > BC\).

  1. Suppose \(AB \leq BC\). This implies either:
     - \(AB = BC\), leading to:
     $$
     \angle A = \angle C
     $$
     (contradicting \(\angle C > \angle A\)), or
     - \(AB < BC\), leading to:
     $$
     \angle C < \angle A
     $$
     (also contradicting).
  2. Hence, \(AB \leq BC\) is false, which means:
  $$
  AB > BC.
  $$

---

### Corollaries
1. **Corollary 1:** An equiangular triangle is also equilateral.
2. **Corollary 2:** In a right triangle, the hypotenuse is the greatest side.

**Note:** The proofs of these corollaries are straightforward exercises.

