**Comparative lengths of the straight segment and a broken line connecting the same pair of points.**

**Theorem 4.7.1 (Triangle Inequality).** The sum of any two sides of a triangle is greater than the third side.

**Proof.** Suppose, in Fig. 4.7.1, \(AB\) is the greatest side of \(\Delta ABC\). Then it is enough to prove that 

$$ 
AB < AC + CB. 
$$

It is natural to start the proof with the construction of a segment equal to \(AC + CB\). We shall do this by prolonging \(AC\) beyond \(C\) till the point \(D\) such that 

$$ 
CD = CB. 
$$

Then, \(\Delta BCD\) will be isosceles, \(\angle CDB = \angle CBD < \angle ABD\) (where \(\angle CBD\) is only a part of \(\angle ABD\)); hence in \(\Delta ABD\), 

$$ 
AB < AD, 
$$ 

since \(AB\) is opposite to a smaller angle (\(\angle CDB\)). Thus, 

$$ 
AB < AD = AC + CD = AC + CB, \quad \text{Q.E.D.} 
$$

**Corollary 1** Each side of a triangle is greater than the difference between the other two sides.

**Proof.** We shall use again Fig. 4.7.1 and the obtained inequality, 

$$ 
AB < AC + CB. 
$$ 

Subtracting \(AC\) and then \(CB\) from both sides of the inequality, we shall obtain: 

$$ 
AB - AC < CB, \quad AB - CB < AC. 
$$ 

These inequalities prove the Corollary for \(CB\) and \(AC\), thus it will be valid for the greatest side, \(AB\), as well. So, the Corollary is valid for all three sides, Q.E.D.

**Theorem 4.7.2** A straight segment connecting two points is less than any broken line connecting these points.

**Remark.** It should be specified that the words “less than a broken line” mean “less than the sum of the sides of a broken line.”

**Proof.** For a broken line consisting of two sides, the theorem reduces to Th. 4.7.1. If a broken line consists of a greater (than two) number of segments, the result of Th. 4.7.1 should be applied to prove the statement using the Principle of Mathematical Induction.

For instance, for broken line \(ACDB\) in Fig. 4.7.2, we join points \(D\) and \(A\) by a straight segment. Then, 

$$ 
AB < AD + DB, 
$$ 

and 

$$ 
AD < AC + CD. 
$$ 

The latter leads to 

$$ 
AB < AC + CD + DB, \quad \text{Q.E.D.} 
$$

**Hint:** In order to complete the proof of the statement by Mathematical Induction, assume that it is true for any broken line that consists of \(n\) sides and prove that it will be true for a broken line consisting of \((n + 1)\) sides. (The proof is similar to the above, which assumes \(n = 2\).)

**Theorem 4.7.3** If two triangles have two sides of one congruent to two sides of the other, then

(i) if the included angles are not congruent, then the third sides are not congruent, the greater side being opposite the greater angle; and conversely,

(ii) if the third sides are not congruent, then the angles opposite those sides are not congruent, the greater angle being opposite the greater side.

**Proof.** We shall prove first the direct (i) and then – the converse (ii) statement.

(i) Given (Fig. 4.7.3): \(AC = A_1C_1\), \(AB = A_1B_1\), and \(\angle BAC > \angle B_1A_1C_1\). We are proving that 

$$ 
BC > B_1C_1. 
$$ 

Let \(\Delta A_1B_1C_1\) be placed with \(A_1C_1\) coinciding with its equal \(AC\) and \(A_1B_1\) taking the position \(AB_2\) in the interior of \(\angle BAC\) (since \(\angle B_1A_1C_1 < \angle BAC\)). Then \(\Delta A_1B_1C_1\) takes the position \(AB_2C\). Point \(B_2\) may get inside \(\Delta ABC\), outside \(\Delta ABC\), or right on \(BC\); the same kind of proof can be applied to any of these cases. In Fig.4.7.3 point \(B_2\) falls in the exterior of the triangle.

Let us draw \(AD\) bisecting \(\angle BAB_2\) with \(D\) lying on \(BC\). Join \(D\) with \(B_2\) by a straight segment. Then 

$$ 
\Delta ABD = \Delta AB_2D 
$$ 

as having a common side \(AD\), \(\angle 1 = \angle 2\), and \(AB = AB_2\). Hence, \(BD = B_2D\). Now, from \(\Delta DCB_2\) we conclude: 

$$ 
B_2C < DC + B_2D = DC + BD = BC. 
$$ 

That means \(B_1C_1 < BC, \quad \text{Q.E.D.} \)

(ii) Consider the same figure (4.7.3) suggesting \(AB = A_1B_1\), \(AC = A_1C_1\), and \(BC > B_1C_1\). We shall prove that 

$$ 
\angle BAC > \angle B_1A_1C_1. 
$$ 

If we suggest that 

$$ 
\angle BAC = \angle B_1A_1C_1, 
$$ 

i.e. the equality of the angles takes place, then \(\Delta ABC = \Delta A_1B_1C_1\), which is impossible, since \(BC \neq B_1C_1\). If 

$$ 
\angle BAC < \angle B_1A_1C_1, 
$$ 

it will lead, by point (i) of this theorem, to 

$$ 
BC < B_1C_1. 
$$ 

The latter contradicts the condition of the theorem. Thus, the only option left is 

$$ 
BC > B_1C_1, \quad \text{Q.E.D.} 
$$

